# Content of the cmake folder

Geniac provides a utility to configure and install nextflow pipeline using `cmake`. The main `CMakeLists.txt` used by geniac to install a pipeline is located at the root directory of the geniac source repository. The `cmake` folder contains additional `cmake` scripts which are used by the main script. Among the `cmake` files there are:

- `Find{ToolNane}.cmake`: to find that an expected command in a minimal version is available.
- `step{SomeName}.cmake`: to perform dedicated steps during the install process.
- `checkConfigFiles.cmake`: to check if the config files supposed to be generated by geniac have been commited in the pipeline repository.
- `create{SomeDirectories}.cmake`: to create directories to organize the files during the build step.
- `functionColorMessage.cmake`: to display message depending on its criticity.
- `CMakeLists.txt`: to include all the `step{SomeName}.cmake` in the correct order. This `CMakeLists.txt` file is in turn included in the main `CMakeLists.txt` located in the root directory of the geniac source code.

In addition to the `cmake` file, the script `initCmakePreload.sh` allows the generation of the cmake file with all the available options and CACHE values. Whenever new options are added in the file  `stepSetVariables.cmake`, the `initCmakePreload.sh` script must be executed and its output must be written in the file `data/cmake-init-default.cmake`. This file provides all the list of variables that can be customized to install the pipeline. It makes possible to install the pipeline using `cmake -C cmake-init-default.cmake` command.

